Environmental Conservation 28 (1): 23–38 © 2001 Foundation for Environmental Conservation

Soybean cultivation as a threat to the environment in Brazil

P H I L I P   M .   F E A R N S I D E *
Department of Ecology, National Institute for Research in the Amazon (INPA), Avenida André Araújo, 2936 CP 478, 69011–970 Manaus,
Amazonas. Study supported by Centre for Applied Biodiversity Science, Conservation International
Date submitted: 7 January 2000 Date accepted: 10 October 2000

Summary

Introduction

Soybeans  represent  a  recent  and  powerful  threat  to
tropical  biodiversity  in  Brazil.  Developing  effective
strategies to contain and minimize the environmental
impact of soybean cultivation requires understanding
of both the forces that drive the soybean advance and
the  many  ways  that  soybeans  and  their  associated
infrastructure  catalyse  destructive  processes.  The
present  paper  presents  an  up-to-date  review  of  the
advance of soybeans in Brazil, its environmental and
social costs and implications for development policy.
Soybeans are driven by global market forces, making
them  different  from  many  of  the  land-use  changes
that  have  dominated  the  scene  in  Brazil  so  far,
particularly  in  Amazonia.  Soybeans  are  much  more
damaging  than  other  crops  because  they  justify
massive  transportation  infrastructure  projects  that
unleash  a  chain  of  events  leading  to  destruction  of
natural habitats over wide areas in addition to what is
directly  cultivated  for  soybeans.  The  capacity  of
global markets to absorb additional production repre-
sents the most likely limit to the spread of soybeans,
although Brazil may someday come to see the need for
discouraging rather than subsidizing this crop because
many  of  its  effects  are  unfavourable  to  national
interests,  including  severe  concentration  of  land
tenure  and  income,  expulsion  of  population  to
Amazonian  frontier,  and  gold-mining,  as  well  as
urban  areas,  and  the  opportunity  cost  of  substantial
drains  on  government  resources.  The  multiple
impacts  of  soybean  expansion  on  biodiversity  and
other development considerations have several impli-
cations  for  policy:  (1)  protected  areas  need  to  be
created  in  advance  of  soybean  frontiers,  (2)  elimin-
ation  of  the  many  subsidies  that  speed  soybean
expansion  beyond  what  would  occur  otherwise  from
market forces is to be encouraged, (3) studies to assess
the costs of social and environmental impacts associ-
ated  with  soybean  expansion  are  urgently  required,
and  (4)  the  environmental-impact  regulatory  system
requires  strengthening,  including  mechanisms  for
commitments  not  to  implant  speciﬁc  infrastructure
projects that are judged to have excessive impacts.

Keywords: soy,  soybeans,  deforestation,  Amazonia,  Brazil,
biodiversity

*Correspondence:  Dr  Philip  M.  Fearnside  Tel:  (cid:2)55  92  643  1822
Fax: (cid:2)55 92 642 8909 e-mail: pmfearn@inpa.gov.br

International  markets  for  soybeans  have  been  rapidly
expanding and the amount supplied by tropical sources has
increased even faster than the total volume of global soybean
trade, as soy growing has progressively been transferred from
temperate  to  tropical  areas  where  land  is  cheaper.  Latin
America  is  the  principal  focus  of  this  expansion,  especially
Brazil, followed by Bolivia and Paraguay.

Soybeans represent a new and powerful force among the
panoply  of  threats  to  biodiversity  in  Brazil  (Carvalho  1999;
Osava  1999).  Effective  strategies  to  contain  the  advance  of
soybeans  and  the  damage  this  advance  causes  will  require
both  understanding  the  processes  by  which  the  advance
occurs and the nature of its impacts. Changing the direction
of development can only be expected if decision-makers and
the public are aware of the full range of impacts and of the
often indirect means by which they are inﬂicted.

The  decision-making  process  clearly  takes  little  note  of
the impacts when major projects are launched. The picture of
development  that  emerges  is  one  of  a  blind  ﬂight  towards
ever-greater  and  more  widely-dispersed  areas  of  soybeans.
Brazil’s 
legal  mechanisms  for  assessing  environmental
impacts and licensing infrastructure projects are incapable of
detecting many of the most severe consequences of soybeans,
especially the ‘dragging effect’ through which other destruc-
tive activities (such as ranching and logging) are accelerated
by infrastructure built for soybeans. Even when problems are
evident  despite  limitations  of  the  environmental  impact
assessment system, the system is no match for the lobbying
power of soy interests. In addition to the inadequacy of regu-
latory safeguards, the decision-making process that generates
proposal after proposal for grandiose infrastructure projects
is effectively disconnected from any consideration of the far-
ranging  impacts  these  projects  cause.  These  aspects  of  the
situation should not be taken as givens, but rather as subject
to  change.  Considering  the  ramiﬁcations  of  the  spread  of
soybeans in some detail provides ample justiﬁcation for such
reforms. The present paper presents a review of up-to-date
information  on  the  dynamics  and  potential  impacts  of  the
advance  of  soybeans  in  Brazil  with  a  view  to  identifying
appropriate policy responses.

Soybeans and deforestation

The global market for soybeans, which propels the advance of
this  crop,  is  really  composed  of  three  markets:  whole
soybeans, soy oil and soy meal. Most meal goes to Europe (to
feed  poultry  and  hogs)  and  most  oil  to  Asia.  The  global

24

Philip M. Fearnside

Figure 1 Original vegetation types in Brazil, including
areas threatened by soy development in the Pantanal
wetlands, Amazonian forests, cerrado savannas and ‘other’
Amazonian savannas.

soybean  harvest  has  been  rapidly  increasing,  expanding  at
10% per annum over the 1989–1998 period (Mendez 1999).
China, which was an exporter of soybeans as recently as 1993,
is now the world’s largest importer in all three markets: whole
soybeans, oil and meal (Brown et al. 1999). Future demand
from China is a major factor in the extent to which soybean
cultivation will spread in Brazil.

Much of the soybean planting so far has been in areas outside
of tropical forest, such as cerrado (central Brazilian scrub
savanna) and in various kinds of native Amazonian grasslands
(campos) (Fig. 1). However, this vegetation harbours a high
diversity that is often under-appreciated: Brazilian cerrado is
believed to be the most diverse of the world’s savannas in terms
of number of species (Klink et al. 1993; Myers et al. 2000).

The ‘dragging effect’ and destructive development

The  impact  of  soybeans  greatly  exceeds  the  loss  of  natural
areas  directly  converted  to  this  land  use  because  of  the
massive infrastructure development needed to provide trans-
portation  for  harvest  and  entry  of  inputs.  Other  land  uses,
such as cattle pasture, occupy vast areas but do not carry the
political weight needed to induce the government to build up
to eight industrial waterways (Fig. 2), three railways, and an
extensive  network  of  highways  (Fig.  3).  Much  of  the
Amazonian  portion  of  the  federal  government’s  1996–1999
‘Brazil in Action’ (Brasil em Ação) programme was devoted to
soybean  infrastructure  (Consórcio  Brasiliana  1998;  Brazil,
Programa Brasil em Ação 1999). The 2000–2003 Pluriannual
Plan  (PPA),  better  known  as  ‘Forward  Brazil’  (Avança
Brasil),  foresees  budget  allocations  for  the  same  infrastruc-
ture (Brazil, Programa Avança Brasil 1999, 2000). There are
additional existing and planned waterways in other parts of
the country, but these are not directly related to soybeans.

Much  of  the  effect  of  the  infrastructure  projects  comes

Figure 2 Industrial hidrovias (waterways) for soybean
transport. Waterways 1, 4 and the southern part of 5 are
partially operational; 2 and 3 are in advanced stages of the
licensing process; the northern part of 5 is included in
Forward Brazil plans, and 6, 7 and 8 are in preliminary
stages of discussion.

from what Brazilian planners call the ‘dragging effect’ (efeito
de arraste), or the stimulation of private investment as a result
of public expenditure in a project. According to the head of
‘Brazil in Action’, the Madeira Waterway is expected to have
a  ‘dragging  effect’  equal  to  three  times  the  direct  expendi-
tures  on  the  project  (Paulo  Silveiro,  Director,  Brazil  in
Action Programme, public statement 1998). The investments
attracted  can  be  expected  to  include  logging,  ranching  and
other activities with severe biodiversity impacts.

The cost to the country of producing soybeans includes not
only money invested in infrastructure and in the soy production
system, but also the opportunity cost of lost environmental
services caused by the full impact on natural ecosystems
affectedbythe‘draggingeffect’,notjustwhatisplanteddirectly
to soybeans. The ‘dragging effect’ completely escapes the
current environmental impact statement and project licensing
process in Brazil (Fearnside 2001a). Costs include biodiversity
loss when natural ecosystems are converted to soybeans, severe
impacts to some of the transportation systems, soil erosion,
health and environmental effects of agricultural chemicals,
expulsion of population that formerly inhabited the areas used
for soybeans, lack of production of food for local consumption
because crop land used for subsistence agriculture is taken over
by soybeans, and the opportunity cost of government funds
devoted to subsidizing soybeans not being used for education,
health and investment in activities that generate more employ-
ment than does mechanized cultivation of soy. Employment
generation by soybean cultivation is minimal. In Maranhão, on
average only one worker is employed per 167 ha of soybeans,

Soybean cultivation in Brazil

25

Figure 3 Locations mentioned in the text.

and on large plantations this ratio rises to one per 200 ha
(Carvalho 1999). The employment created often contributes
nothing to alleviating local unemployment. For example, in
Humaitá, Amazonas, skilled workers from the state of Rio
Grande do Sul (Fig. 3) are brought in to operate the agricultural
machinery (P.M. Fearnside, personal observation).

The rise of soybeans

Brazil produced just under one-quarter of the global soybean
harvest in 1998, making it the world’s second largest producer,
behind the USA, which produces about half the global harvest
(Brown et al. 1999, p. 32). Brazil’s 1999 soy area totalled 13
million ha (Brazil, CNPSO-EMBRAPA 1999). Brazil’s long
growing season represents a great advantage over competitors
in temperate countries. Not only are higher annual yields
achieved than in North America, but the extra time in the
growing season relieves Brazilian farmers of the exceedingly
intense bursts of activity at planting and harvesting times that
are necessary for their temperate-zone competitors.

In the 1970s, anchovy ﬁsheries off the coast of Peru
collapsed, and this contributed to the use of soybeans as a

substitute for ﬁsh meal in animal feeds in North America and
Europe (see Fearnside 1995). In addition, a drought in North
America led to a temporary suspension of shipments to Europe
from that major international exporter (Smith et al. 1995). The
resulting increase in soybean prices led to rapid expansion of
mechanized soybean cultivation in the southern Brazilian state
of Paraná. A frost in southern Brazil in 1975 also speeded aban-
donment of coffee. Other factors inducing landholders in
southern Brazil to switch from labour-intensive crops such as
coffee included increased rights given to sharecroppers under
a 1964 land statute and minimum wage laws that increased the
cost of hiring labourers (Kaimowitz & Smith 2001).

Soybeans then moved from Paraná to the cerrado (Klink
1995;  Klink  et  al. 1994).  The  march  of  soybean  cultivation
over the last 30 years is shown in maps of data at the level of
counties  (municípios)  from  the  Brazilian  Institute  for
Geography and Statistics (IGBE; Fig. 4).

An  important  factor  in  the  advance  of  soybeans  into  the
cerrado  was  development  of  soybean-bacteria  combinations
with pseudosymbiotic relationships that allow soybeans to be
planted with no application of nitrogen fertilizer. This was a
triumph for Brazilian research (see, for example Döbereiner

26

Philip M. Fearnside

Programme

Development of the Cerrados (POLOCENTRO) distributed
highly subsidized loans between 1975 and 1982, which were
responsible for conversion of 2.4 million ha of savanna to
agriculture (Mueller et al. 1992). Another key event in the
history of the soybean advance in the cerrado was the Nippo-
Brazilian Co-operation
for Agricultural
Development of the Cerrado (PRODECER), begun in 1974
with ﬁnance from the Japanese International Cooperation
Agency ( JICA). This programme has continued, the current
PRODECER-III programme being focused on expanding
soybeans in the county of Pedro Afonso, in the Bico de
Papagaio (Parrot’s Beak) region in the northern-most part of
the state of Tocantins (Carvalho 1999), an area famous for
farmers and large
violent
grileiros
(see
Foweraker 1981). The large ranchers have now essentially
won these battles, having driven small farmers to more
distant frontiers. The land is now being converted from cattle
to soybean production.

land conﬂicts between small
(land grabbers)

in the 1970s and 1980s

Brazil’s overall soybean area declined slightly from 13.2 to
12.7  million  ha  from  1998  to  1999  (Brazil,  CNPSO-
EMBRAPA  1999),  however,  soybean-growing  continued  to
shift  to  Amazonia.  In  1996,  there  were  only  1800 ha  of
soybeans  in  Rondônia,  but  the  area  increased  to  4700 ha  by
1998,  and  to  14 000 ha  in  1999.  In  Maranhão,  the  soy  area
increased  from  89 100  to  140 000 ha  over  the  1996–1999
period (Brazil, CNPSO-EMBRAPA 1999).

The current advance of soybeans into the Amazonian
part of Brazil
is different from other kinds of land-use
conversion in recent years. The role of global markets in
soybean expansion is in marked contrast to the dominant
land use in deforested parts of Brazilian Amazonia, namely
cattle pasture. Cattle ranching has,
in the context of
Brazilian Amazonia, been largely motivated by ulterior
motives such as land speculation, land-tenure establishment,
and ﬁscal incentives (see Hecht et al. 1988; Fearnside 1987a;
2001b). Even logging has been, in the Brazilian context,
dominated by domestic markets
(Smeraldi &
Veríssimo 1999).

so far

Soybeans  have  been  rapidly  expanding  in  Brazilian
Amazonia as a combined result of high prices (still favourable
despite recent declines) and indirect government subsidies in
various  forms,  including  massive  public  expenditure  on
transportation infrastructure such as the hidrovias (industrial
waterways;  Fig.  2).  Infrastructure  projects  already  built  or
under  construction  include  the  Madeira  Waterway,  the
Itacoatiara  soybean  terminal,  part  of  the  North-South
Railway,  and  the  BR-333  Highway 
linking  southern
Maranhão to Minas Gerais. Projects not yet built include the
Araguaia–Tocantins  Waterway,  the  Teles  Pires–Tapajós
Waterway,  the  Capim  River  Waterway,  the  North-South
Railway  (Anápolis–Açailândia),  the  Ferronorte  Railway
(Uberaba  and  Santa  Fé  do  Sul–Vilhena,  and  later  to  Porto
Velho), the Paraguay–Paraná River Waterway (the ‘Pantanal
Waterway’), reconstruction of the Madeira-Mamoré Railway
and  associated  development  of  a  waterway  on  the  Mamoré

Figure 4 Soybean cultivation in (a) 1977, (b) 1990, (c) 1996.
Areas of circles are proportional to soybean areas by
municipio (county). After Théry (1999).

1992).  Development  of  varieties  tolerant  to  low  soil  phos-
phorus and high aluminium was also critical (Spehar 1995).
Generous subsidies were a key factor in inducing the
movement of soybeans to the cerrado. The Program for

Because agricultural

and  Guaporé  rivers,  paving  of  the  Santarém-Cuiabá
Highway  (BR-163)  and  construction  of  the  Road  to  the
Paciﬁc.  Other  plans  have  been  announced  that  may  lead  to
construction projects further in the future. For example, in
1999,  the  governor  of  the  State  of  Amazonas  proposed
building  a  waterway  to  connect  the  state  with  the  Orinoco
Basin  in  Venezuela  (Anon.  1999a).  Completion  of  the  Boa
Vista-Georgetown, Guyana, Highway is also proposed. All of
these projects would have substantial environmental impacts.
research provided the key to
opening the cerrado to soy cultivation (Paterniani &
Malavolta 1999), this is frequently presented in political
discourse as proof positive that research will solve the
remaining barriers to opening the vast humid tropics of
Amazonia to similarly productive agriculture. Patriotic spirit
is often claimed as the critical element: a few decades ago no
one believed that the cerrado was good for anything, and
now it is a great producer of soybeans. The next line in such
rhetoric normally goes ‘If only we believe in Amazonia . . .’.
Unfortunately, more than rhetoric is needed to make
sustainable use of the Amazon, although rhetoric is often
sufﬁcient to launch grandiose development programmes that
lead to large-scale destruction for ephemeral rewards (see
Fearnside 1986a). Severe limits restrain productive use of
the very large areas contemplated in Amazonian develop-
ment plans (Fearnside 1997a). These include limits on
inputs, such as phosphates, that must be imported from
elsewhere (Fearnside 1998). Topography and physical
factors are most important for mechanized agriculture, as in
the case of soybeans. The best soil
in Amazonia on a
commercially important scale (terra roxa: Alﬁsol) is usually
associated with sloping topography. One question essential
to evaluating Brazil’s national interest in promoting this land
use is whether large-scale soybean cultivation is sustainable.
Some locations contemplated for soybeans have soils with
severe limitations. The National Development Bank (Brazil,
EMBRAPA  1998:  Amazonas,  p.  60)  cautions  that  ‘without
well-deﬁned  technical  criteria’  the  soil  could  be  rendered
unusable by soybean cultivation in the counties of Humaitá,
Canutama and Lábrea. This kind of warning is common in
discussions of Amazonia development, such as the frequent
warnings  of  EMBRAPA  that  pastures  will  produce  well  in
Amazonia only with ‘adequate management’. The problem is
that everyone involved knows that the ‘technical criteria’ or
‘adequate management’ is unlikely to be applied in practice.
The  result  is  that  later,  when  problems  occur,  government
agronomists can always point the ﬁnger at the farmer for not
having  used  ‘technical  criteria’  or  ‘adequate  management’:
the blame is shifted from the government to the farmer for
any failures that may occur.

Environmental and social impacts

Impacts of converting land to soybeans

An obvious impact is the loss of natural ecosystems that are
converted  to  soybeans.  However,  few  soybean  planters  cut

Soybean cultivation in Brazil

27

forest themselves; instead they buy already cleared land from
small farmers who will then move to frontier areas and clear
more  (Carvalho  1999).  Many  small  farmers  who  now  are
threatened  with  expulsion  from  their  land  in  Amazonia
because  of  the  advance  of  soybeans  came  to  the  region  as  a
result of being expelled from small farms on older frontiers
such as Paraná.

When  land  is  converted  to  mechanized  crops  like
soybeans,  most  of  the  human  population  is  expelled,  and
many  move  on  to  deforest  elsewhere  (Carvalho  1999).  In
Paraná,  soybeans  replaced  small  farmers  growing  maize,
beans and other food crops, in addition to coffee. The rise of
soybeans  displaced  11  agricultural  workers  for  every  one
ﬁnding employment in the new production system (Zockun
1980).  In  the  1970s,  2.5  million  people  left  rural  areas  in
Paraná; in the same period, the number of farms declined by
109 000  in  Paraná  and  300 000  in  Rio  Grande  do  Sul
(Kaimowitz  &  Smith  2001).  Although  most  small  farmers
who were displaced moved to urban areas, many migrated to
frontier areas in Rondônia via the new World Bank-ﬁnanced
BR-364 Highway, where they were a key factor in one of the
world’s  most  rapid  explosions  of  tropical  deforestation
activity (Fearnside 1986b, 1987a).

The  Brazilian  cerrado  has  suffered  particularly  heavy
losses to the advance of soybeans. For many years, environ-
mental concerns led to recommendations to favour cerrado as
a  substitute  for  rain  forest  clearing  (see,  for  example
Goodland et al. 1978). There is some regret of this now that
the cerrado is fast disappearing. Remaining areas of cerrado
have  biodiversity  importance  that  rivals  that  of  equivalent
areas  of  Amazonian  forest  (Dinerstein  et  al. 1995).  The
cerrado,  with  only  1.5%  in  federal  reserves  (Ratter  et  al.
1997), is one of the least-protected ecosystems in Brazil. Less
protected  still  is  the  ecotone  between  forest  and  cerrado,  a
strip that has a higher number of endemic species of plants
than  either  ‘pure’  forest  or  cerrado  (Fearnside  &  Ferraz
1995).

Agrochemicals used to combat diseases, insects and weeds
in  soy  cultivation  can  have  impacts  on  the  environment,  as
well  as  on  the  people  who  are  exposed  to  them.  This  is  a
particular  concern  with  respect  to  plans  for  expansion  of
soybeans in the várzea (ﬂood plain) near Santarém (Carvalho
1999). During the low-water period, ﬂood plain lakes shrink
or  dry  up,  concentrating  ﬁsh  that  are  easily  caught.  If  the
surrounding land is under soybeans, the high doses of agro-
chemicals used on this crop can be expected to concentrate in
the lakes and in the ﬁsh.

Soybean cultivation provokes soil compaction and erosion
(Barber et al. 1996). Aeolean erosion may be particularly
severe in Mato Grosso State, but no measurements of losses
exist
( Jean Dubois, President, Brazilian Network for
Agroforestry, personal communication 1999). An idea of the
consequences from soil degradation can be gained from the
experience in Bolivia. In the area near the city of Santa Cruz,
where soybeans have been an important land use since the
1970s, degradation is already severe (Alan Bojanic, former

28

Philip M. Fearnside

director of Center for Research in Tropical Agriculture
(CIAT), Santa Cruz, Bolivia branch ofﬁce, personal
communication 1999). This raises doubts about the long-
term sustainability of rapidly-expanding areas in Amazonia,
as the soils near Santa Cruz are Entisols that are more fertile
than the soils on the Brazilian Shield located in the northern
and eastern parts of the Bolivian lowlands, as well as in
Brazil. At least initially, soils around Santa Cruz can be
cultivated without
applications,
contrasting sharply with soils in Brazilian cerrado and
(Alan Bojanic, personal
Amazonian forest
communication 1999). In the late 1990s, over 100 000 ha of
soy land was abandoned to cattle pasture because of soil
exhaustion, and the three major Mennonite settlements that
had farmed the area have moved to clear forest land farther
north (Alan Bojanic, personal communication 1999). The
area of relatively fertile soils is rapidly coming to an end for
further movement of this mechanized version of shifting
cultivation.

locations

fertilizer

lime

and

Because  soybeans  require  heavy  capital  investment  in
machinery,  land  preparation,  and  agricultural  inputs,  this
crop is inherently the domain of wealthy agribusiness entre-
preneurs  rather  than  poor  farmers.  Extreme 
income
concentration  has  been  associated  with  soybeans  wherever
they have spread in Latin America (Kaimowitz et al. 1999).
Income concentration and the associated political inﬂuence of
powerful elites have negative repercussions throughout soci-
eties where these transformations are taking place.

Short-term plans for infrastructure 

Road to the Paciﬁc
Plans for soybean production in the state of Acre are given as
a justiﬁcation for building the Road to the Paciﬁc, either via
Assis  Brasil  (in  southern  Acre)  and  Cuzco,  Peru,  or  via
Cruzeiro do Sul (in western Acre) and Pucallpa, Peru (Fig.
3). However, the economic viability of transporting soybeans
across the Andes by truck has yet to be shown. Lack of econ-
omic  viability  does  not  imply  guaranteed  protection  of  the
environment from such projects. Whether or not soy export
via  the  Andes  is  economic,  it  can  provide  an  excuse  for
expensive  public  works  to  go  forward,  propelled  by  the
ﬁnancial interests of construction contractors and by electoral
use  of  the  project.  The  Balbina  and  Jatapu  Dams  provide
well-documented  examples  (Fearnside  1989;  Fearnside  &
Barbosa 1996).

Infrastructure  projects 

implanted  with  the  primary
purpose  of  transporting  soybeans  will  have  effects  on  the
economic  attractiveness  of  other  commodities,  with  conse-
quent impacts on the environment. Timber export from Acre
on the Road to the Paciﬁc provides an example. 

Paraguay-Paraná (Pantanal) Waterway
Impacts of the Paraguay-Paraná Waterway (Fig. 2) would be
substantial, posing a threat to the wildlife and general biodi-
versity of the Pantanal (Blumenschein et al. 1999; Hamilton

1999),  and  the  portion  of  the  waterway  from  Corumbá  to
Cáceres would be the worst stretch in the region (Buscher &
Huszar 1995).

The Brazilian government announced in March 1998 that
it was dropping plans for the Paraguay-Paraná Waterway (see
Associated Press 1998). This kind of announcement provides
only fragile protection from damaging projects of this kind, as
recently made clear by the case of the Babaquara Dam on the
Xingu  River.  Since  1992  government  ofﬁcials  have  made
innumerable  statements  declaring  that  this  dam  will  not  be
built, but now it has appeared with a new name (the Altamira
Dam) in the current decennial plan (Brazil, ELETROBRÁS
1998,  p.  148)  with  completion  scheduled  for  2013.  The
problem  is  that  we  lack  a  legal  mechanism  by  which  the
government can make irrevocable commitments not to build
speciﬁc  projects  that  are  known  to  be  damaging.  Like
Babaquara,  the  Corumbá-Cáceres  stretch  of  the  Pantanal
Waterway  has  now  quietly  resurfaced  with  inclusion  in  the
‘Forward  Brazil’  portfolio  (Consórcio  Brasiliana  2000)  and
with work on a new port facility near Cáceres (Switkes 2000).

for 

(RIMA) 

impact  statement 

Tocantins-Araguaia Waterway
The  Tocantins-Araguaia  Waterway  (Fig.  2)  would  expose
Bananal Island, the site of both the Araguaia Indigenous Park
and the Araguaia National Park, to wave action, and would
negatively affect ﬁsheries in the river (Cohen 1995; Switkes
1999). The environmental impact study (EIA) and environ-
this  waterway
mental 
(FADESP 1996a,b) omitted portions of the original text that
mentioned  expected  increases  in  mortality  in  tribes  in  the
Araguaia Indigenous Park due to the effect of pollution and
barge  trafﬁc  on  ﬁsheries  resources.  This  has  led  to  accu-
sations by the anthropologists who worked on the EIA that
the version of the EIA and RIMA reports submitted to the
Brazilian  Institute  of  the  Environment  and  Renewable
Natural Resources (IBAMA) was ‘unscrupulous and in bad
faith’ (Carvalho 1999). Multiple failings in the RIMA led to
a court order in June 1997 suspending work on this waterway
(Switkes 1999). Among other failings, there is no mention of
what  would  be  done  with  2.5  million  m3 of  sediment  to  be
dredged  from  the  river  and  204 000  m3 of  rocks  to  be
exploded  (Novaes  1998).  The  report  failed  to  mention  that
the river is too dry to navigate from June to November, the
time of year when soybeans would be harvested. It assumed
transportation  of  30  million  tonnes  of  soybeans  per  year,
which  is  six  times  the  current  production  of  Mato  Grosso,
and,  without  naming  a  single  product,  supposed  that  the
barges  would  carry  return  freight  equal  to  50%  of  this
capacity (Novaes 1998). The waterway would compete with
the  North-South  Railway  for  transporting  production  from
many  of  the  same  soy-producing  areas.  The  public  hearing
for the waterway was suspended on 22 September 1999 by a
judicial ruling in favour of the anthropologists who had been
misrepresented 
in  the  report  (Silveira  1999).  On  29
September  1999,  the  construction  consortium  obtained  a
counter-ruling,  allowing  preparations  for  the  waterway  to

proceed 
(Radiobrás  1999).  The  Tocantins-Araguaia
Waterway  continues  to  be  a  priority  project  under  the
‘Forward Brazil’ programme (Consórcio Brasiliana 2000).

The  Tocantins-Araguaia  Waterway  would 

include
installing shiplocks in Tucuruí Dam and in a long series of
planned hydroelectric dams on those rivers (Fearnside 1999).
The path of the waterway includes a 925-m change in eleva-
tion.  The  question  of  how  decisions  will  be  reached  on
whether to install locks in dozens of dams is a delicate one, as
Brazil’s  Minister  of  Development  since  14  September  1999
had,  until  his  appointment,  been  president  of  the  Camargo
Corrêa  construction  company  (Anon.1999b).  At  the  time  of
his  appointment,  Camargo  Corrêa  was  already  installing
locks  in  the  ﬁrst  dam  (Tucuruí)  and  was  best  positioned  to
obtain  all  of  the  contracts  along  the  Tocantins-Araguaia
Waterway.

Teles Pires-Tapajós Waterway
Work  on  the  Teles  Pires-Tapajós  Waterway  (Fig.  2)  was
suspended  by  a  court  order  in  June  1997  because  its  EIA
omitted mention of impacts on indigenous people along the
route (Novaes 1998). Impacts on the Mundurucu tribe were
omitted by a division of the report into two sections, one for
the stretch below the tribe and the other for the one above it,
and simply neglected to make any mention of the existence of
the tribe (Novaes 1998). Omitting mention of the Indians was
a  means  of  avoiding  the  constitutional  requirement  of
obtaining project approval from Congress.

Madeira Waterway
In  March  1997,  barges  began  to  arrive  in  Itacoatiara,
Amazonas, at a new soy terminal that had been largely paid
for by the state government (Anon. 1997a). The warehouse
has storage capacity for 90 000 tonnes, and in a second phase,
this  will  be  doubled  (Luís  Antônio  Pagot,  Director,
HERMASA Navegação da Amazônia, SA, public statement
1997). Since the terminal began operation, 145 trucks per day
have  been  arriving  in  Porto  Velho  (Fig.  3)  loaded  with
soybeans. Soybeans are transferred to barges to go down the
Madeira  River  to  the  port  of  Itacoatiara,  where  they  are
stored and loaded on ships for export. This new export route
has cut the transport cost by a factor of three (Luís Antônio
Pagot, public statement 1997), thereby radically changing the
economic context for agriculture in the Madeira River basin.
For the time being, the soy comes from savanna areas in
Mato  Grosso  State,  especially  Sapezal,  at  the  centre  of  the
Maggi  soy  empire  (Vieira  &  Giraldez  1999).  However,  the
government  of  Amazonas  State 
is  giving  priority  to
promoting  soybeans  and  irrigated  rice  in  the  campos  de
Humaitá,  a  natural  grassland  in  the  southern  part  of
Amazonas  (Anon.  1997b).  The  classic  study  on  soils  of  the
campos  de  Humaitá  condemned  this  area  for  agricultural
development due to the laterisation danger (Gross Braun &
de  Andrade  Ramos  1959).  Although  the  danger  of  wide-
spread laterisation in Amazonia has often been exaggerated,
in places where the water table ﬂuctuates the danger is real

Soybean cultivation in Brazil

29

(Sánchez  1976).  Soils  in  the  campos  de  Humaitá  have
impeded drainage, causing the water table to ﬂuctuate close
to the surface (Fearnside 1997b). 

The  Maggi  group,  which  installed  the  port,  plans  to
expand its plantations in the campos de Humaitá, provided
that it is permitted by the economic-ecological zoning of the
area,  now  being  effected  by  the  state  government  (Luís
Antônio Pagot, public statement 1997). Maggi has conducted
agricultural  experimentation  at  the  site  since  1993,  and  the
belief is that laterisation would not be a problem because soil
can be drained by installing canals that would lead the water
to the streams (Luís Antônio Pagot, public statement 1997). 
The Waterway and soy terminals bring little local beneﬁt.
The  Itacoatiara  terminal  employs  only  17  people  (Osava
1999).  Tax  beneﬁts  are  also  minimal  because,  since  1996,
Complementary  Law  No.  87,  better  known  as  the  ‘Kandir
Law’, has exempted products bound for export from paying
the  tax  on  services  (ISS)  that  would  otherwise  go  to  the
county  governments  (Carvalho  1999).  Prior  to  the  exemp-
tion,  Brazilian  soybean  growers  were  at  a  disadvantage
compared 
their  Bolivian  competitors,  who  paid
US$37.17/t less in taxes (Monitor Company 1994).

to 

The  Madeira  Waterway  provides  a  good  example  of  a
generic  problem  with  infrastructure  projects  of  this  kind,
namely,  evolution  of  the  projects  after  construction  has
begun,  leading  to  greater  impacts  than  those  considered  in
the original EIA and RIMA. In practice, pressure generated
by the economic activity already all but guarantees approval
of  any  request  for  additional  infrastructure.  After  soybean
shipments began, HERMASA (the barge company owned by
Maggi) requested that the Rondônia state government allow
shortcutting a sharp bend in the Madeira River downstream
of Porto Velho, which would cut through the Cuniã Lake at
the Cuniã Ecological Station, a protected area. The cut could
lead to draining the wetlands and riverine lakes that harbour
the  abundant  wildlife  for  which  the  ecological  station  was
created. Plans for river straightening were not included in the
proposal  considered  by  the  current  EIA  and  RIMA  for  the
waterway,  which  was  approved  in  1999.  The  planned
increase  in  barge  trafﬁc  from  an  initial  300 000  t/year  to  3
(HERMASA  1995,  cited  by
million 
Blumenschein et al. 1999) implies need to both straighten the
river bed and remove the rock obstructions along the route.
The  EIA  and  RIMA  only  covered  removal  of  three  rock
obstructions.  Without  these  modiﬁcations,  the  waterway  is
only  passable  during  the  high-water  period.  The  total
number of obstructions that would need to be removed has
been variously stated as six (Luis Antônio Pagot, public state-
ment 1997) to nine (Blumenschein et al. 1999).

t/yr  by  2000 

Boa Vista-Georgetown Highway
A  proposed  all-weather  highway  from  Boa  Vista  to
Georgetown,  Guyana,  would  provide  a  600-km  route  for
export from Roraima, whose governor is attempting to attract
soybean growers from the south and central-west regions of
Brazil  by  offering  such  inducements  as  exemption  from  all

30

Philip M. Fearnside

taxes for 20 years, the cheapest land in Brazil (US$5–50/ha),
and  the  services  of  a  government-sponsored  co-operative
(COOPERNORTE;  Veríssimo  1999).  In  August  1999,  the
Roraima  state  government  chartered  an  aeroplane  to  ﬂy  60
prospective  investors  to  the  state;  the  goal  was  to  invest
US$300  million  over  ﬁve  years  and  to  have  200 000 ha  of
soybeans  in  Roraima  by  2003  (Veríssimo  1999).  Like  the
Road  to  the  Paciﬁc,  although  the  arguments  for  the  Boa
Vista-Georgetown  Highway  are  largely  based  on  soybeans,
much of the project’s environmental impact would probably
be felt through effects on other commodities. In this case, the
notoriously-destructive  Malaysian  logging  companies  with
concessions in Guyana are likely to be major beneﬁciaries (cf.
Colchester 1994; Veening & Groenendijk 2000).

Santarém-Cuiabá Highway
A 75 000-tonne capacity soybean terminal at Santarém, Pará,
began operation in May 2000 (see Carvalho 1999). Plans for
producing  soybeans  include  paving  the  Santarém-Cuiabá
Highway  (BR-163),  part  of  ‘Forward  Brazil’,  and  improve-
ment  of  the  waterway  from  Itaituba  to  Santarém  (Fig.  3),
where  soybean  planting  would  also  be  promoted  in  the
varzea.

The Santarém-Cuiabá Highway is an area that is already a
major  source  of  illegally  cut  mahogany  (Fearnside  1997c).
Political pressure for paving the road is led by Blairo Maggi,
senator from Mato Grosso and head of the Maggi Group that
is ﬁnancing soy planting in Santarém and construction of the
Santarém and Itaituba soy terminals. The campaign included
a  caminhonaço (truck  caravan)  travelling  along  the  route  in
May 1999 to demonstrate the viability of exporting soybeans
from  northern  Mato  Grosso  through  the  port  of  Itaituba
(Vieira & Giraldez 1999).

Capim River Waterway
The Capim River Waterway would give barge access to the
Paragominas soybean pole, connecting it with the deep-water
port in Barcarena.

North-South Railway
The North-South Railway would connect Goiânia in Goiás
State, with Açailândia in Maranhão, where it would connect
with the Carajás Railway leading to the ports of Itaiquí and
Ponto  da  Madeira  near  São  Luís  (Fig.  3).  The  Carajás
Railway  has  been  functioning  for  iron-ore  transport  since
1984. Part of the North-South Railway was built in 1988 but
was halted as a result of a major ﬁnancial scandal.

Ferronorte Railway
The  portion  of  the  Ferronorte  Railway  included  in  the
‘Forward  Brazil’  Programme  would  connect  Uberaba  and
Uberlândia,  in  Minas  Gerais  to  Cuiabá,  Mato  Grosso,  and
then with Vilhena, Rondônia (Fig. 3). The railway will also
connect  to  the  rail  network  in  the  State  of  São  Paulo
(FEPASA) at Santa Fé do Sul. The route would pass through
major soybean areas such as Rondonópolis. Construction of

the bridge over the Paraná River was completed in January
1998.

Other highways
In 1996 the 450km MT-235 Highway was completed cutting
across the Chapada dos Parecis of Mato Grosso from east to
west  from  Comodoro  to  Sapezal  and  Campo  Novo  dos
Parecis (Fig. 3). Large areas were cleared for soybeans along
the  route  in  its  ﬁrst  year,  in  anticipation  of  export  via  the
Madeira Waterway (Blumenschein et al. 1999).

Highways from Maranhão to Minas Gerais link the major
soybean  production  area  around  Balsas, 
in  southern
Maranhão,  with  the  road  system  in  Minas  Gerais,  also
providing access to agricultural areas in state of Piauí. These
highways, which were paved for soybean transport under the
World  Bank’s  highway  improvement  loan  for  Maranhão,
Piauí and Tocantins, pass through the best-preserved area of
remaining  cerrado  vegetation,  according  to  the  Brazilian
Institute of Space Research (INPE) study of 1992 and 1993
satellite  images  that  found  65%  of  the  cerrado  had  been
cleared for pasture, agriculture and urban settlements by that
time (Mantovani & Pereira 1998, cited by Stedman-Edwards
1999).

A  road  construction  and  soybean  project  in  Apuí  on  the
Transamazon Highway in the south-east corner of the state
of  Amazonas  is  of  particular  concern  both  for  its  potential
impacts and for the extent to which this case has revealed the
inability of Brazil’s environmental regulatory mechanisms to
function in practice. The municipal government of Apuí and
the government of the adjacent county in Mato Grosso began
building a road to connect the two (Anon. 1999c). The road,
which is not part of ‘Forward Brazil’, was being built without
any form of environmental impact statement or approval, and
was  halted  by  the  Amazonas  state  environmental  agency  in
September  1999  (Anon.  1999d).  Brazil’s  constitution  and
legislation  require  an  EIA  and  RIMA  for  all  highways.
However, no criteria of what constitutes highway construc-
tion,  as  opposed  to  improvement,  are  given.  In  practice,
proponents  can  claim  that  even  an  illegal  logging  track
through  the  forest  can  be  upgraded  by  degrees  to  a  paved
thoroughfare  without  being  considered  highway  ‘construc-
tion’  (Francisco  Arguelles,  Public  Ministry  of  the  State  of
Amazonas, Specialized Prosecutor’s Ofﬁce for Defense of the
Environment  and  Historical  Patrimony  (PRODEMAPH),
Manaus, personal communication 1999).

The  road  from  Aripuanã  in  Mato  Grosso,  to  Apuí  in
Amazonas,  will  connect  with  an  existing  road  connecting
Apuí  to  the  port  of  Novo  Aripuanã  in  Amazonas,  on  the
Madeira River (Fig. 3). This road was built without beneﬁt of
an EIA and RIMA by claiming that it was merely improving
access  roads  to  settlements  implanted  by  the  National
Institute  of  Colonization  and  Agrarian  Reform  (INCRA).
The two roads would reduce the distance that soybeans must
travel by truck from production areas in north-western Mato
Grosso.  The  Maggi  Group  is  reportedly  helping  with
construction  of  the  Aripuanã-Apuí  road  and  with  improve-

ment  of  the  Apuí-Novo  Aripuanã  Road.  The  Soybean
Producers  Co-operative  of  Amazonas  (COPASA),  which  is
led  by  Maggi,  is  attempting  to  obtain  title  to  850 000 ha  of
terras  devolutas (government  land)  in  the  county  of  Novo
Aripuanã  (Fachel  1999).  COPASA  publicly  encouraged
farmers  to  clear  new  areas  as  quickly  as  possible  between
December 1998 and August 1999 so that the areas could be
used for soy planting (Carvalho 1999). Maggi has promised to
buy  all  soybeans  produced  by  the  co-operative  (Carvalho
1999). COPASA has encouraged migrants to come to the area
to  clear,  and  a  total  of  85 000 ha  has  been  deforested  so  far
(Fachel 1999). It is unclear what will become of the migrants
once the land is converted to soybeans, since employment in
soybean production is minimal.

Long-term plans for infrastructure

It  is  unlikely  that  funding  for  all  of  the  infrastructure
described  in  the  ‘Forward  Brazil’  Programme  will  become
available within the 2000–2003 time span of the programme.
However,  we  can  expect  the  same  overall  plan  to  be  main-
tained while the time scale is extended to conform to funding
restrictions.  Beyond  the  ‘Forward  Brazil’  Programme,  a
number  of  additional  soybean  transportation  projects  are
planned  (Table  1).  Each  of  these  would  have  substantial
environmental impacts.

Soybean cultivation in Brazil

31

Impacts of soy-related industries

Processing  industries  and  other  activities  associated  with
soybeans  can  also  have  impacts,  especially  by  stimulating
expansion of plantations. Brazil’s soybean-crushing mills are
mainly located near the older producing areas in the southern
part  of  the  country.  Additional  crushing  facilities  are  being
planned,  including  one  in  Itacoatiara,  Amazonas,  with
Venezuelan capital (Anon. 1999a). The ‘sunk costs’ of indus-
trial  and  storage  facilities  was  a  major  factor  empowering
Brazil’s  soybean  lobby  in  the  1980s  in  their  efforts  to  gain
additional  government  subsidies  for  expanded  planting.  In
1982  Brazil’s  processing  capacity  was  double  what  was
needed for the size of the soybean crop because of incentives
that  had  been  given  for  processing  facilities  (Williams  &
Thompson 1984).

Since a large part of Brazil’s soybean harvest is shipped to
Rotterdam  and  then  fed  to  European  pigs,  Holambra  (a
Dutch  agribusiness  ﬁrm  in  São  Paulo)  proposed  settling  a
colony  of  Dutch  pig  farmers  in  Mato  Grosso.  This  would
obviously  eliminate  much  of  the  transportation  required  by
the  current  arrangement.  It  should  be  remembered  that
industrial-scale  swine  raising  produces  substantial  pollution
from  manure  and  urine,  as  is  now  occurring  in  the
Netherlands. Brazil’s swine industry, which is concentrated
in Santa Catarina State, has the same problems.

Another Dutch proposal foresaw shipment of manure

Table 1 Beyond ‘Forward Brazil’: long-term plans for soy infrastructure. a May be either via Assis Brasil, Acre and Cuzco,
Peru, or via Cruzeiro do Sul, Acre and Pucallpa, Peru. b Maggi plans to plant 500 000 ha of soybeans in Roraima if the Rio
Branco Waterway proves feasible (Gonçalves 1998). In addition, the Grãos Norte Programme hopes to increase the area of
soybeans in the state from near zero in 1999 to 200 000 ha in 2005 for export soybeans by road via Venezuela (Mary Helena
Allegretti, Secretary for Amazonia, Ministry of the Environment, public statement 1999).

Project
Road to the Paciﬁc

Starting location
Rio Branco, Acre

Ending location
Una, Perua

Rio Branco Waterwayb

Itacoatiara, Amazonas

Boa Vista, Roraima

Açaílândia–Belém Railway

Açaílândia, Maranhão

Belém, Pará

Cuiabá-Santarém Railway

Cuiabá, Mato Grosso

Santarém, Pará

Cuiabá-Porto Velho Railway

Cuiabá, Mato Grosso

Porto Velho, Rondônia

Madeira-Mamoré Railway
Guaporé-Mamoré Waterway

Guajará-Mirim, Rondônia
Vila Bela de Santíssima

Porto Velho, Rondônia
Guajará-Mirim, Rondônia

Trindade, Mato Grosso 

Orinoco-Rio Negro Waterway

Itacoatiara, Amazonas

Puerto Ayacucho, Venezuela

Status
Announced as a goal by President Ferrnando 
Henrique Cardoso, only the Brazilian 
portions (Sena Madureira-Cruzeiro do Sul
and Rio Branco-Assis Brasil) are included 
in the Forward Brazil programme.

Appears on Ministry of Transportation maps 
(Brazil, Ministério dos Transportes 1999), 
but not included in Forward Brazil.

Appears on Ministry of Transportation maps 
(Brazil, Ministério dos Transportes 2000), 
but not included in Forward Brazil. 

Appears on Ministry of Transportation maps 
(Brazil, Ministério dos Transportes 2000), 
but not included in Forward Brazil.

Appears on Ministry of Transportation maps 
(Brazil, Ministério dos Transportes 2000), 
but not included in Forward Brazil.

Announced by Amazonas state governor 
Amazonino Mendes (Anon. 1999a) 

32

Philip M. Fearnside

from the Netherlands to Amazonia, using the return journey
of the ships that bring soybeans to Rotterdam. The manure
would be used as fertilizer in Amazonia. While the proponents
of the scheme envisage manure increasing the sustainability of
Amazonian agriculture and reducing deforestation, the result
would probably be more complex. Increasing the proﬁtability
of agriculture normally has the opposite effect on deforesta-
tion (Fearnside 1987b). The plan has apparently not advanced
due to opposition by Brazilian non-governmental organiz-
ations concerned over possible contamination by heavy metals
and growth hormones (Wim G. Sombroek, International
Soils Reference Information Centre (ISRIC), Wageningen,
the Netherlands, personal communication 1999).

Future prospects: dynamics of soybean
expansion

Lobbies and subsidies

Lobbies operate at federal, state and municipal levels. State-
level  development  decisions  are  strongly  inﬂuenced  by
soybeans. In Maranhão, for example, the head of planning in
the state government has a rapidly expanding soybean empire
in  the  Balsas  area  of  the  state.  Pending  decisions  include
revoking part of the Serra do Mirador (Itapecuru) State Park,
in  the  upper  Itapecuru  Valley  of  Maranhão.  A  part  of  the
park  that  is  suitable  for  soybeans  would  be  exchanged  for
protecting areas elsewhere in the state (Afonso Henriques de
Jesus Lopes, Coordinator for Maranhão, Natural Resources
Sub-Program  (SPRN),  Pilot  Program  to  Conserve  the
Brazilian  Rainforest  (PP-G7),  São  Luis,  Maranhão,  public
statement 1999).

In Maranhão, the babassu palm (Attalea, formerly Orbignya
spp.) has traditionally been a source of oil and a variety of other
products. Improving industrial means of using these palm
fruits has long been a priority for sustaining the local popu-
lation living from babassu extractivism (May 1990). The State
Institute of Babassu (INEB) was created by the government of
Maranhão for this purpose, but after only four years it was
abolished in 1984. In Maranhão, it is widely believed that the
reason was the governor’s ﬁnancial interests in soybeans, with
which babassu was still competing, at that time, as a source of
oil in the local market (for example Cleary 2000).

Family  agriculture  in  Maranhão  is  rapidly  retreating
before the advance of soybeans, aggravating social disparities
in  a  state  that  is  already  notorious  for  poverty  and  social
inequalities  (Carneiro  1999).  Maranhão  is  also  one  of  the
largest  sources  of  migrants  to  Amazonia,  supplying  popu-
lation to both pioneer settlement areas and the gold-rush in
garimpos (wildcat mining areas) (see, for example MacMillan
1995;  Cleary  2000).  Gold-mining  causes  severe  environ-
mental  and  social  impacts,  including  mercury  pollution,
release of large quantities of sediment into the headwaters of
lands,
Amazonian  rivers,  and 
exposing the Indians to disease, violence and deculturation,
as  well  as  impeding  the  recognition  and  demarcation  of
reserves.

invasion  of 

indigenous 

The expulsion of population from Maranhão has also led to
deforestation by landless migrants in Amazonia, as well as
supplying the largest source of cheap labour used by
Amazonian ranchers for their clearing. Of 19 landless peasants
massacred by federal police at Eldorado dos Carajás, Pará, in
1996, seven (37%) were from Maranhão (Anon. 1996).

State  governments  have  been  instrumental  in  promoting
the  rapid  entry  of  soybeans  into  Amazonia.  In  Amazonas
State,  an  agricultural  promotion  scheme  that  includes  the
Humaitá soybean and irrigated rice areas was a centrepiece of
the governor’s campaign in the 1998 gubernatorial election.
Establishing  soybean  areas  in  Humaitá  would  have  been
unlikely  without  the  wide  range  of  subsidies  given  by  the
state. Fertilizer was brought from Israel by the state govern-
ment  and  distributed  with  payment  due  only  after  the
harvest.  Fertilizer  from  Cubatão,  near  Santos,  São  Paulo
(3340  km  away)  would  cost  US$200/t  (Brazil,  EMBRAPA
1998: Amazonas), considering the mid-1999 exchange rate of
R$1.7 (cid:3) US$1. Lime, which does not exist in the Humaitá
area, was brought by truck from Pimenta Bueno, Rondônia
(700  km  away)  and  distributed  free  of  charge.  Lime  in
Pimenta Bueno costs US$7.05/t, and freight to Humaitá is
US$22.94/t.  The  capacity  of  the  Pimenta  Bueno  deposit  is
266  million  t  (Brazil,  EMBRAPA  1998:  Amazonas,  p.  65).
The  next  nearest  deposit  is  in  Cáceres,  Mato  Grosso  (1440
km  away),  where  lime  costs  US$6.47/t  and  freight  to
Humaitá is US$29.41/t.

Lime  is  now  being  shipped  to  Humaitá  by  barge  from
Urucará on the Jatapu River (1000 km by river; Fig. 3); the
capacity of the Urucará deposit is 48 million tonnes. The next
nearest  deposit  accessible  by  river  is  in  Maués,  Amazonas
(1200  km  by  river),  with  a  capacity  of  175  million  tonnes
(Brazil, EMBRAPA 1998: Amazonas, p. 66).

Lime, and its transportation, is generally considered the
main expense
in establishing soybean cultivation in
Amazonia. The Humaitá soybean pole is extreme in having
no lime deposit nearby. The pole in Redenção, Pará, has a
lime deposit considered to be of poor quality (Carvalho
1999). The pole at Santarém beneﬁts from a large lime
deposit near Itaituba (Fig. 3). Apuí in Amazonas has a lime
deposit in the county that is not yet developed; poor road
conditions between Apuí and Humaitá have kept
this
from entering current plans for supplying the
deposit
Humaitá
(Brazil, EMBRAPA 1998:
Amazonas).

soybean

pole

Lime  must  be  reapplied  every  three  years.  The  lime
requirement  is  4–8  t/ha  if  calculated  on  the  basis  of
aluminium saturation (Brazil, EMBRAPA 1998: Amazonas,
p. 62). If lime requirement is estimated considering calcium
and magnesium in addition to aluminium, the requirement is
7–8 t/ha (Brazil, EMBRAPA 1998: Amazonas, p. 62). Less-
massive lime requirements represents one of the inducements
for  movement  of  soybeans  into  Amazonia,  as  less  lime  is
required in recently cleared forest as compared to cerrado. In
forest, 2 t/ha of lime are required, versus 4–6 t/ha in cerrado
(Homma & Carvalho 1998).

The government subsidy for soybeans goes beyond the
visible infrastructure planned under programmes such as
‘Forward Brazil’, which is the ﬂagship of the current presi-
dential administration. Agricultural credit for purchase of
inputs, such as seeds and chemicals, and especially for trac-
tors and other machinery, is given at rates well below those
that would apply on the basis of standard ﬁnancial calcula-
tions, especially if the risk of default is taken into account.
Brazilian agricultural credit has long been heavily inﬂuenced
by lobbies from large producers, and soybeans have been a
favourite crop because the large farmers who produce them
have secure land titles, collateral, and lower transaction
costs for banks (Helfand 1999, p. 7). Because soybean prices
are subject to ﬂuctuations, and because bad weather, insects,
and other misfortunes may reduce production,
farmers
often ﬁnd loans ﬁnancially difﬁcult to repay. Since price
cycles and agricultural problems affect all farmers simul-
taneously, the farm lobby (known as ruralistas in Brazil)
represents a signiﬁcant interest group to apply pressure on
the government to make special concessions. On several
occasions, the government has simply cancelled all agricul-
tural debts, amounting to a subsidy that often totals tens of
billions of US dollars to the agricultural sector. In 1999,
pressure from the farm lobby led to a partial amnesty of the
year’s agricultural debts (Provisional Measure 1918) that
will cost an undisclosed amount considerably higher than
the US$4 billion cost of the previous agreement with the
farm lobby (Anon. 1999e).

The soy lobby is credited with obtaining federal subsidies
allowing soybeans to expand into areas that were more distant
and  had  poorer  soils  than  would  have  been  justiﬁed  in  the
absence of subsidies (Kaimowitz & Smith 2001). Particularly
important  is  northern  Mato  Grosso,  where  environmental
impacts  of  soybean  expansion  are  particularly  strong.  In
addition  to  subsidized  credit,  in  the  mid-1980s  the  federal
government  maintained  the  Minimum  Price  Guarantee
Policy (Goldin & de Rezende 1993). This meant that farmers
received the same price regardless of their location, encour-
aging  expansion  to  distant  frontiers  where  market  forces
would  otherwise  have  rendered  soybeans  unproﬁtable
(Kaimowitz & Smith 2001). In the 1980s, another subsidy to
distant  plantations  was  Brazil’s  uniﬁed  price  for  petroleum
products,  where  the  same  price  for  fuel  was  charged
throughout  the  country.  Transport  to  and  from  far-ﬂung
locations  thereby  received  a  subsidy  from  fuel  consumers
located near Brazil’s ports and oil reﬁneries.

Rarely  discussed  is  the  opportunity  cost  of  government
money that is spent to subsidize soybeans. Clearly many uses
for money exist that would have much greater returns for the
welfare of the Brazilian people. We cannot know how much
of  such  money  would  actually  go  to  health,  education,
environment  and  other  areas  that  would  produce  greater
social beneﬁts were the funds not used for soybeans. There is
also  a  large  environmental  opportunity  cost  of  sacriﬁcing
natural  ecosystems  such  as  Amazonian  forest  (Fearnside
1997d).

Soybean cultivation in Brazil

33

The transgenic seeds controversy

The close link of soy cultivation to agribusiness-controlled
genetic engineering is an additional source of controversy. The
Brazilian government approval of use of transgenic soybeans
would open the way for Monsanto’s Roundup-Ready™
soybean seeds. The
genetically-engineered Roundup-
Ready™ seeds are resistant to Roundup ™ herbicide, or
glyphosate, which is also manufactured by Monsanto.
Roundup™ kills most other plants, including neighbouring
farmers’ non-resistant soybeans, creating an additional motiv-
ation for all to make the switch together. A wide variety of
doubts have been expressed concerning the potential impacts
of releasing genetically modiﬁed (GM) organisms into the
environment (see, for example Halweil 1999; Labes 1999).
The discovery that monarch butterﬂies can be killed by pollen
from transgenic maize (Losey et al. 1999) has heightened
concern for the lack of understanding of potential impacts; the
contrast with the great care taken in introducing new pharma-
ceutical products is very plain.

Glyphosate herbicides are allegedly linked to reproductive
disorders, genetic damage, liver tumours and developmental
delays in mammals (Cox 1999; Labes 1999). These chemicals
are also considered to adversely affect earthworms, beneﬁcial
soil fungi and nitrogen-ﬁxing bacteria (Cox 1999). On the
positive side, herbicide use reduces the need for plowing, with
attendant soil compaction, erosion and carbon stock depletion.
Brazilian soybean areas can be expected to be dominated by
Roundup-Ready™ soybeans within a year or two after
approval is obtained. In September 1998, Brazil’s National
Technical Commission on Biotechnology approved trans-
genic soybeans for planting in the country, but Brazilian
non-governmental organizations obtained a judicial ruling in
June 1999 requiring an EIA for transgenic soybeans (Arnt
1999). Prior to the ruling, Monsanto expected that 50% of
Brazil’s 13 million ha of soybeans would be converted to
Roundup-Ready™ seeds by 2002 (Labes 1999). The techno-
logical package for this variety results in higher yields at
reduced cost under current price regimes. It bears mentioning,
however, that this transformation will give Monsanto an effec-
tive monopoly over a series of essential inputs in the soybean
production process, thereby increasing the chance that prices
of these inputs will be raised to the maximum level that the
market will bear once the monopoly has been consolidated.

At the least, a switch to transgenic soybeans in Brazil will
make soy cultivation more proﬁtable and so speed the crop’s
advance into Amazonia. On the other hand, if Brazil does not
approve use of transgenic crops and demand for non-trans-
genic soy in Europe results in a premium price, then this too
could speed the advance of soybean growing in Amazonia, an
effect that is already evident (Carvalho 1999).

Limits to the spread of soybeans

How far will soybeans go? The answer depends on the new
equilibrium between supply and demand. It also depends on

34

Philip M. Fearnside

the  point  beyond  which  each  country  considers  further
expansion of soybeans to be contrary to national interest, in
view of the environmental and social impacts of this land use.
Discussions of Brazil’s national interest in soy production
are  confused  by  the  terminology  adopted.  EMBRAPA  and
other agencies active in promoting soybeans scarcely even use
the  term  ‘soybeans’  (soja),  using  instead  the  term  grãos (a
term  without  an  exact  English  equivalent,  referring  to  any
crop where the useful part is the seed, including both grains
and  pulses).  The  difference  between  soybeans  and  grãos  is
much more than semantic. Like agro-pecuária (literally ‘agro-
ranching’), the euphemism for cattle ranching in Amazonia,
calling soybeans grãos serves to convey the implication that
soy is feeding the people of Brazil along with rice, maize and
wheat.  In  reality,  soybean  expansion  is  much  more  akin  to
Brazil’s  long  history  of  predatory  exploitation  of  natural
resources,  such  as  Brazilwood  in  the  Atlantic  forest,  and
minerals  in  Minas  Gerais,  than  it  is  to  agriculture  growing
food crops for local consumption. Maize is often emphasized
in discourse over grãos in Brazil. Maize is indeed usually part
of the crop rotation cycle used with soybeans, but economi-
cally  it  is  only  a  by-product.  Only  soybeans  justify  the
massive  infrastructure  that  gives  this  commodity  such  a
substantial impact on biodiversity.

While a vision of soy feeding Brazilians is often implied in
discourse on the subject, Brazilians like to eat rice and beans,
not  soy.  Although  some  soy  is  consumed  in  the  form  of
cooking oil, this part of the harvest could easily be supplied
by existing soybean areas in Brazil. The further expansion of
soybeans is entirely as an export crop.

Figure  5  illustrates  factors  affecting  the  areal  extent  of
soybean cultivation in Brazil. The feedback of areas planted
to prices represents an important controlling factor; Brazil’s
soybean production is sufﬁcient to have an important impact
on  global  prices  for  this  commodity  (Frechette  1997).
Decision-making  on  government  policy  regarding  subsidies
may seem remote from the reality of how decisions are taken
in  practice  on  such  problems,  but  it  is  important  to  realise

Figure 5 Factors affecting soybean expansion in Brazil. In
causal loop diagrams such as this, the sign near the head of
each arrow represents the direction of change in the quantity
at the head of the arrow given an increase in the quantity at
the tail of the arrow. 

that  a  decision  by  default  is,  in  fact,  being  taken  every  day
(Fig.  5).  Business-as-usual  does  not  just  happen:  it  is  the
result  of  a  tacit  decision  to  leave  policies  unchanged.  The
consequences  of  this  decision,  and  of  alternatives,  must  be
understood and faced.

In  1998,  high  humidity  after  rains  meant  that  Roraima
soybeans  were  struck  by  the  Rhizoctonia fungus  that,  in
beans,  produces  mela,  the  much-feared  web-blight  disease
(de  Andrade  1999).  Similarly,  high  humidity  in  the  varzea
soybean  area  planned  near  Santarém  is  expected  to  carry  a
greater  risk  of  disease  than  in  dry  areas  like  the  cerrado,
leading 
(Carvalho  1999).
Rhizoctonia attack in soybeans is facilitated by the presence of
weeds  (Black  et  al. 1996).  High  rainfall  and  lack  of  dry
periods represent a source of concern for sustainability of soy
cultivation in the western part of Brazilian Amazonia (see de
Andrade 2000).

fungicide  use 

increased 

to 

On 24 June 1997, President Fernando Henrique Cardoso
announced  in  his  weekly  radio  programme  Palavra  do
Presidente (‘The  Word  of  the  President’)  that  six  million
hectares  along  the  BR-174  (Manaus-Caracaraí)  Highway
(Fig.  3)  would  be  opened  to  settlement,  and  suggested  that
the  area  farmed  there  would  be  ‘so  colossal  that  it  would
double the nation’s agricultural production’ (de Cássia 1997).
Despite  almost  certain  hyperbole  in  both  the  expected
production and area likely to be settled, the intention of initi-
ating a major programme on the BR-174 Highway appears to
be real (Fearnside & Leal Filho 2001). The announcement of
the  BR-174  settlement  programme  came  as  a  surprise,  as
paving  of  the  highway  in  1996–97  had  been  presented  as  a
surgical  cut  through  the  forest  that  would  allow  the  city  of
Manaus  to  trade  with  Venezuela  and  have  access  to  that
country’s ports.

Announcements like President Cardoso’s radio broadcast
need to be interpreted with a certain amount of scepticism,
but  they  often  forebode  major  projects  preceding  detailed
plans.  One  generic  problem  in  Amazonian  development
projects is that political pressure to carry out the projects is
generated before the environmental and social impacts of the
projects  are  analysed  and 
judged.  Public  works  are
announced as government commitments before the EIA and
RIMA are prepared, thereby making it difﬁcult, in practice,
to stop projects even when impacts are severe.

Apart from announcements, it also takes adequate market
demand and infrastructure to transport the beans, and lime
and  other  required  inputs,  to  make  great  areas  of  soybeans
appear.  The  extent  to  which  the  rapid  expansion  of  global
soybean markets that has occurred over the past decade will
continue is critical. A major question is whether China will
increase its imports of soy.

Because soybean expansion in the USA is believed to be
approaching its limits, much of the increased demand from
China  is  likely  to  be  met  through  expanding  areas  in  Latin
America. The level of government subsidy to soybeans in the
USA is also a factor, as any decrease in these subsidies would
result in transfer of soy growing to Latin America.

Human decisions, particularly Brazilian government
decisions, will determine to a large degree how soybeans will
advance in Brazil, and to what extent the advance will
continue before a new equilibrium is reached. Clearly the
area in soybeans will not simply go on expanding until this
crop occupies the whole country. The advance can eventu-
ally be expected to stop when supply exceeds global demand
sufﬁciently to cause prices to fall to levels low enough that
further expansion of soybeans becomes unproﬁtable. Before
that point is reached, however, Brazil might well decide that
more expansion of soy-growing areas is not in the national
interest. Reasons include feedback to prices affecting the
proﬁtability of soybean growing throughout the country, the
substantial ﬁnancial drain that government subsidies for
soybeans represents to the budgets of federal, state and
municipal governments, and the social and environmental
costs
soybeans.
ever-larger
Governments might therefore decide to curtail subsidies
before soybean expansion halts by itself under the current
set of economic drivers. We might even imagine govern-
ments
further
expansion of soybeans if it were perceived to be damaging,
but, at present, this is far from the case, with governments
levels vying to attract as much soy investment as
at all
possible.

taking active measures

to discourage

converting

areas

to

of

What is needed is an honest weighing of costs and beneﬁts
of  expanding  soybean  cultivation,  including  all  social  and
environmental costs. Only then can countries like Brazil take
rational  decisions  as  to  how  much  soybean  expansion  is  in
each  country’s  national  interest,  and  with  what  infrastruc-
ture.

Conclusions and recommendations 

The multiple adverse impacts of soybean expansion on biodi-
and  other  development
versity  will  be  mitigated, 
considerations  substantially  addressed,  if  the  following
actions are taken by policy makers.
(1) Create protected areas in advance of soybean frontiers.
(2) Encourage elimination of the many subsidies that speed
soybean  expansion  beyond  what  would  occur  otherwise
from market forces.

(3) Rapidly carry out studies to assess the costs of social and
environmental  impacts  of  soybean  expansion,  including
opportunity costs of money and land.

(4) Strengthen the environmental-impact regulatory system,
including  assessment  of  the  indirect  impacts  (the  ‘drag-
ging  effect’)  of 
in  stimulating  other
economic activities that are often destructive.

infrastructure 

(5) Create mechanisms such that commitments can be made
not  to  implant  speciﬁc  infrastructure  projects  that  are
judged to have excessive impacts.

(6) Encourage  decision-making  based  on  the  full  roster  of
costs and beneﬁts, in contrast to the present system exem-
pliﬁed by the ‘Forward Brazil’ Programme.

Soybean cultivation in Brazil

35

Acknowledgements

Science, 

Conservation 

This is part of the ‘Commodities Project’, Center for Applied
International,
Biodiversity 
Washington, DC. I thank the following people for supplying
valuable information: R.I. Aguirre, R. Smeraldi, J. Hardner,
A.K.O.  Homma,  D.  Kaimowitz,  A.G.  Moreira,  R.  Rice,  S.
Schwartzman,  W.G.  Sombroek,  G.  Switkes,  H.  Théry  and
S.V. Wilson. I also thank the Secretaria de Coordenação da
Amazônia of the Ministério do Meio Ambiente for making it
possible to present some of this work at the ‘Atelier sobre a
Dinâmica da Soja e seus Impactos no Futuro da Amazônia’,
Brasília,  13  September  1999.  Brazil’s  National  Council  of
Scientiﬁc  and  Technological  Development  (CNPq  AI
523980/96–5),  the  National  Institute  for  Research  in  the
Amazon (INPA PPI 1–3160) and Conservation International
provided  ﬁnancial  support.  R.I.  Barbosa,  C.  Gascon,
P.M.L.A.  Graça,  N.V.C.  Polunin,  S.V.  Wilson  and  two
anonymous reviewers commented on the manuscript.

References

Anon. (1996) ‘Como morreram os sem terra’. Folha de São Paulo 10

May 1996: A-10.

Anon.  (1997a)  Itacoatiara  recebe  primeira  barcaça.  Amazonas  em

Tempo (Manaus) 2 March 1997: C–6.

Anon.  (1997b)  Embarque  de  soja  daqui  a  2  meses. Amazonas  em

Tempo (Manaus) 15 January 1997: A–4.

Anon. (1999a) ‘Amazonino quer discutir zoneamento da Amazônia.

Amazonas em Tempo (Manaus) 15 September 1999: B–7.

Anon. (1999b) Presidente da Camargo Corrêa se reúne com FHC e
Malan e aceita pasta; posse ocorre na próxima semana: Tápias vai
para o Desenvolvimento. Folha de São Paulo 7 September 1999:
A–1.

Anon.  (1999c)  Estrada  abre  corredor  entre  Apuí  e  M.  Grosso.

Amazonas em Tempo (Manaus) 8 May 1999: A–7.

Anon.

(1999d)

‘Ipaam interdita estrada que ligaria Apuí a
Mato Grosso. Amazonas em Tempo (Manaus) 24 September 1999:
A–4.

Anon. (1999e) Governo amplia benefícios a ruralistas. Folha de São

Paulo 20 October 1999: A–12.

Arnt,  R.  (1999)  Transgênicos:  os  produtores  contra  os  consumi-

dores. Parabólicos 6(53): 8–9.

Associated  Press  (1998)  Environmentalists  are  skeptical  Pantanal
waterway  was  killed.  International  Rivers  Network  Dossier  Rios
Vivos 7: 10. URL http://www.irn.org.

Barber, R.G., Orellana, M., Navarro, F., Diaz, O. & Soruco, M.A.
(1996)  Effects  of  conservation  and  conventional  tillage  systems
after land clearing on soil properties and crop yield in Santa Cruz,
Bolivia. Soil & Tillage Research 38: 133–52.

Black,  B.D.,  Grifﬁn,  J.L.,  Russin,  J.S.  &  Snow,  J.P.  (1996)  Weed
hosts  for  Rhizoctonia  solani,  causal  agent  for  Rhizoctonia 
foliar  blight  of  soybean  (Glycine  max).  Weed  Technology 10:
865–9.

Blumenschein,  M.,  dos  Reis,  Z.S.  &  Galinkin,  M.  (1999)  Estudo
comparativo da sojicultura na bacia do Alto Paraguai: contribuição
para  avaliação  do  projeto  da  Hidrovia  Paraguai-Paraná.
Unpublished  report,  Cuiabá,  Mato  Grosso,  Brazil:  Núcleo  de
Estudos  Rurais  e  Urbanos  (NERU),  Universidade  Federal  de
Mato Grosso.

36

Philip M. Fearnside

Brazil,  CNPSO-EMBRAPA  (Centro  Nacional  de  Pesquisas 
de  Soja-Empresa  Brasileira  de  Pesquisa  Agropecuária)  (1999)
e  produtividade.  URL  http://
Soja: 
www.cnpso.embrapa.br/tab02x1.html

área,  produção 

Brazil,  ELETROBRÁS  (Centrais  Elétricas  Brasileiras,  SA)  (1998)
Janeiro,  Brazil:

1999–2008.  Rio 

de 

Plano  Decenal 
ELETROBRÁS.

Brazil, EMBRAPA (Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuária)
(1998)  Relatório  de  consultoria  da  Embrapa  para  o  BNDES.
Brasília, Brazil: EMBRAPA. 3 volumes.

Brazil,  Ministério  dos  Transportes  (1999)  Hidrovia  Tocantins-
Araguaia.  URL  http://www.transportes.gov.br/STA/DHI
/toacara.htm

Brazil,  Ministério  dos  Transportes  (2000)  Ferronorte.  URL
http://www.transportes.gov.br/bit/ferro/plferronorte.htm 
(1 September 2000).

Brazil,  Programa  Avança  Brasil  (1999)  Programa  Avança  Brasil.

URL http://www.abrasil.gov.br

Brazil,  Programa  Avança  Brasil  (2000)  Portfolio  de  investimentos.

URL http://www.eixos.gov.br/asp/Projetos

Brazil,  Programa  Brasil  em  Ação  (1999)  Brazil  in  Action.  URL

http://www.brazil-in-action.gov.br

Brown,  L.R.,  Renner,  M.  &  Halweil,  B.  (1999)  Vital  Signs  1999:
that  are  Shaping  our  Future.

The  Environmental  Trends 
Washington, DC, USA: Worldwatch Institute: 197 pp.

Buscher, E.H. & Huszar, P.C. (1995) Critical environmental costs of
in  South-America.

the  Paraguay-Parana  Waterway  project 
Ecological Economics 15(1): 3–9.

Carneiro,  M.S.  (1999)  Agricultura  Familiar  e  Grandes  Projetos  no
Maranhão  na  Década  de  90:  Resultados  e  Perspectivas.  São  Luís,
Maranhão, Brazil: Forum Carajás: 24 pp.

Carvalho, R. (1999) A Amazônia rumo ao ‘ciclo da soja’. Amazônia
Papers No. 2. São Paulo, Brazil: Programa Amazônia, Amigos da
Terra: 8 pp. URL http://www.amazonia.org.br

Cleary,  D.  (2000)  Small-scale  goldmining  in  Brazilian  Amazonia.
In:  Amazonia  at  the  Crossroads:  The  Challenge  of  Sustainable
Development,  ed.  A.  Hall,  pp.  58-72.  London,  UK:  Institute  of
Latin American Studies (ILAS), University of London.

Cohen,  M.  (1995)  Araguaia–Tocantins:  recursos  parcos  para  uma

obra estratégica. Parabólicas 7(2): 4.

Colchester, M. (1994) The new sultans: Asian loggers move in on

Guyana’s forests. The Ecologist 24: 45–52.

Consórcio  Brasiliana  (1998)  Programa  Brasil  em  Ação:  Eixos
Nacionais  de  Integração  e  Desenvolvimento.  Banco  Nacional  de
Desenvolvimento  Econômico  e  Social  (BNDES)  PBA/CN-
01/97.  Brasília,  DF,  Brazil:  Relatório  Final  do  Marco  Inicial,
Consórcio Brasiliana. 3 volumes.

Consórcio  Brasiliana  (2000)  Programa  Brasil  em  Ação:  Eixos
Nacionais  de  Integração  e  Desenvolvimento:  Identiﬁcação  de
Oportunidades  de  Investimentos  Públicos  e/ou  Privados. Banco
Nacional  de  Desenvolvimento  Econômico  e  Social  (BNDES)
PBA/CN-01/97.  Brasília,  DF,  Brazil:  Relatório  Síntese,
Consórcio Brasiliana. 3 volumes.

Cox, C. (1999) Glyphosate (Roundup). Global Pesticide Campaigner

9: 12–9.

de  Andrade,  E.B.  (1999)  Tecnologias  para  o  desenvolvimento  da
soja e impactos sobre o meio ambiente na Amazônia. Unpublished
report, ‘Terceiro Atelier de Análise Prospectiva: A Dinâmica da
Soja  e  seus  Impactos  no  futuro  da  Amazônia’,  13  September,
Brasília, Brazil. URL http://www.bcdam.gov.br

de  Andrade,  E.B.  (2000)  Seminário  Produção  Intensiva  de  Soja  e

Outros  Grãos  na  Amazônia:  Potencialidades  e  Limitações
Tecnológicas  e  Ambientais  (Relatório  Sintético).  Belém,  Brazil:
Empresa  Brasileira  de  Pesquisa  Agropecuária  (EMBRAPA)
Amazônia Oriental.

de Cássia, R. (1997) BR–174: FHC anuncia abertura de nova fron-
teira  agrícola  no  Norte.  Amazonas  em  Tempo (Manaus)  25  June
1997: A–4.

Dinerstein, E., Olson, D.M., Graham, D.J., Webster, A.L., Primm,
S.A.,  Bookbinder,  M.P.  &  Ledec,  G.  (1995)  A  Conservation
Assessment  of  the  Terrestrial  Ecoregions  of  Latin  America  and  the
Caribbean. Washington, DC, USA: World Bank: 129 pp.

Döbereiner, J. (1992) Recent changes in concepts of plant bacteria
interactions: endophytic N2 ﬁxing bacteria. Ciência e Cultura 44:
310–3.

Fachel, F. (1999) Cooperativa destrói a selva amazônica para plantar
soja.  Jornal  do  ambiente 2  September  1999.  URL  http://
www.egroups.com/lists/jorn-ambiente

FADESP  (Fundação  de  Amparo  e  Desenvolvimento  da  Pesquisa)
(1996a) Relatório de Estudos de Impacto Ambiental – EIA, referente
ao projeto de implantação da Hidrovia dos rios Tocantins, Araguaia e
Mortes. Belém, Para, Brazil: FADESP, Universidade Federal do
Pará (UFPA). 7 volumes.

FADESP  (Fundação  de  Amparo  e  Desenvolvimento  da  Pesquisa)
(1996b) Relatório de Estudos de Impacto Ambiental – EIA, referente
ao projeto de implantação da Hidrovia dos rios Tocantins, Araguaia e
das Mortes. Belém, Para, Brazil: FADESP, Universidade Federal
do Pará (UFPA): 109 pp.

Fearnside, P.M. (1986a) Human Carrying Capacity of the Brazilian
Rainforest. New York, USA: Columbia University Press. 293 pp.
Fearnside,  P.M.  (1986b)  Spatial  concentration  of  deforestation  in

the Brazilian Amazon. Ambio 15: 72–9.

Fearnside,  P.M.  (1987a)  Causes  of  deforestation  in  the  Brazilian
Amazon.  In:  The  Geophysiology  of  Amazonia:  Vegetation  and
Climate  Interactions,  ed.  R.F.  Dickinson,  pp.  37-61.  New  York,
USA: John Wiley & Sons.

Fearnside,  P.M.  (1987b)  Rethinking  continuous  cultivation  in

Amazonia. BioScience 37: 209–14.

Fearnside, P.M. (1989) Brazil’s Balbina Dam: environment versus
in  Amazonia.  Environmental

legacy  of  the  pharaohs 

the 
Management 13: 401–23.

Fearnside,  P.M.  (1995)  Potential  impacts  of  climatic  change  on
natural forests and forestry in Brazilian Amazonia. Forest Ecology
and Management 78: 51–70.

Fearnside, P.M. (1997a) Limiting factors for development of agri-
culture and ranching in Brazilian Amazonia. Revista Brasileira de
Biologia 57: 531-49.

Fearnside,  P.M.  (1997b)  Comentários  do  Acadêmico  Prof.  Philip
M.  Fearnside  sobre  ‘Solos  e  os  planos  do  Estado  do  Amazonas
para expansão da soja nos campos de Humaitá’. In: A Importância
da  Ciência  para  o  Desenvolvimento  Nacional,  ed.  C.E.  Rocha-
Miranda, pp. 96-9. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Academia Brasileira de
Ciências.

Fearnside, P.M. (1997c) Protection of mahogany: a catalytic species
in  the  destruction  of  rain  forests  in  the  American  tropics.
Environmental Conservation 24: 303–6.

Fearnside,  P.M.  (1997d)  Environmental  services  as  a  strategy  for
sustainable development in rural Amazonia. Ecological Economics
20: 53–70.

Fearnside, P.M. (1998) Phosphorus and human carrying capacity in
Brazilian  Amazonia.  In:  Phosphorus  in  Plant  Biology:  Regulatory
Roles in  Molecular,  Cellular, Organismic,  and  Ecosystem Processes,

ed. J.P. Lynch & J. Deikman, pp. 94–108. Rockville, MD, USA:
American Society of Plant Physiologists.

Fearnside,  P.M.  (1999)  Social  impacts  of  Brazil’s  Tucuruí  Dam.

Environmental Management 24: 483–95.

Fearnside, P.M. (2001a) Environmental impacts of Brazil’s Tucuruí
Dam:  Unlearned  lessons  for  hydroelectric  development  in
Amazonia. Environmental Management 27(3): in press.

Fearnside,  P.M.  (2001b)  Can  pasture  intensiﬁcation  discourage
deforestation in the Amazon and Pantanal regions of Brazil? In:
Patterns  and  Processes  of  Land  Use  and  Forest  Change  in  the
Amazon,  ed.  C.H.  Wood.  Gainesville,  FL,  USA:  University
Presses of Florida, in press.

Fearnside, P.M. & Barbosa, R.I. (1996) Political beneﬁts as barriers
to assessment of environmental costs in Brazil’s Amazonian devel-
opment  planning:  the  example  of  the  Jatapu  Dam  in  Roraima.
Environmental Management 20: 615–30.

Fearnside,  P.M.  &  Ferraz,  J.  (1995)  A  conservation  gap  analysis 
of  Brazil’s  Amazonian  vegetation.  Conservation  Biology 9:
1134–47.

Fearnside, P.M. & Leal Filho, N. (2001) Soil and development in
Amazonia:  lessons  from  the  Biological  Dynamics  of  Forest
Fragments  Project.  In:  Lessons  from  Amazonia:  The  Ecology  and
Conservation  of  a  Fragmented  Forest,  ed.  R.O.  Bierregaard,  C.
Gascon, T.E. Lovejoy & R. Mesquita. New Haven, CT, USA.
Foweraker, J. (1981) The Struggle for Land: A Political Economy of
the  Pioneer  Frontier  in  Brazil  from  1930  to  the  Present  Day.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press: 260 pp.

Frechette,  D.L.  (1997)  The  dynamics  of  convenience  and  the
Brazilian  soybean  boom.  American  Journal  of  Agricultural
Economics 79: 1108–18.

Goldin,  I.  &  de  Rezende,  G.C.  (1993)  A  Agricultura  Brasileira  na
Década de 80: Crescimento numa Economia em Crise. IPEA 138. Rio
de  Janeiro,  Brazil:  Instituto  de  Pesquisa  Econômica  Aplicada
(IPEA): 119 pp.

Gonçalves,  M.A.  (1998)  Soy  advances  upon  Roraima’s  savanna.
URL  http://www.socioambiental.org/website/noticias/english
/indigenous/19982310.htm

Goodland,  R.J.A.,  Irwin,  H.S.  &  Tillman,  G.  (1978)  Ecological

development for Amazonia. Ciência e Cultura 30: 275–89.

Gross  Braun,  E.H.  &  de  Andrade  Ramos,  J.R.  (1959)  Estudo
agroecológico  dos 
campos  Puciari-Humaitá—Estado  do
Amazonas e Território Federal de Rondônia. Revista Brasileira de
Geograﬁa 21: 443–97.

Halweil,  B.  (1999)  The  emperor’s  new  crops.  Worldwatch 12(4):

21–9.

Hamilton, S.K. (1999) Potential effects of a major navigation project
(the  Paraguay-Paraná  Hidrovia)  on  inundation  of  the  Pantanal
ﬂoodplains.  Regulated  Rivers—Research  &  Management 15:
289–99.

Hecht, S.B., Norgaard, R.B. & Possio, C. (1988) The economics of
cattle ranching in eastern Amazonia. Interciencia 13: 233–40.
Helfand, S.M. (1999) The political economy of agricultural policy
in Brazil: decision making and inﬂuence from 1964 to 1992. Latin
American Research Review 24(2): 3–41.

HERMASA (1995) Projeto de implantação dos terminais portuários
de  Itacoatiara/AM  e  Porto  Velho/RO.  Unpublished  report.
Manaus,  Amazonas,  Brazil:  HERMASA  Navegação  da
Amazônia, SA.

Homma, A.K.O. & Carvalho, R.A. (1998) A expansão do monocul-
tivo  da  soja  na  Amazônia:  início  de  um  novo  cíclo  e  as
conseqüências  ambientais.  Unpublished  report,  II  Encontro  da

Soybean cultivation in Brazil

37

Sociedade  Brasileira  de  Economia  Ecológica  ECO–ECO:  São
Paulo,  November  1997:  ECO-ECO:  Rio  de  Janeiro,  RJ,  Brazil 
8 pp.

Kaimowitz, D. & Smith, J. (2001) Soybean technology and the loss
of  natural  vegetation  in  Brazil  and  Bolivia.  In:  Agricultural
Technologies  and  Tropical  Deforestation,  ed.  A.  Angelson  &  D.
Kaimowitz. Wallingford, UK: CAB International.

Kaimowitz,  D.,  Thiele,  G.  &  Pacheco,  P.  (1999)  The  effects  of
structural adjustment policies on deforestation and forest degra-
dation in lowland Bolivia. World Development 27: 505–20.

Klink,  C.A.  (1995)  De  Grão  em  Grão:  O  Cerrado  Perde  Espaço.
Brasilia,  Brazil:  World  Wide  Fund  for  Nature  (WWF-Brasil): 
66 pp.

Klink,  C.A.,  Macedo,  R.H.  &  Mueller,  C.C.  (1994)  Cerrado:
Processo de Ocupação e Implicações para a Conservação e Utilização
da  sua  Diversidade  Biológica.  Brasilia,  Brazil:  World  Wide  Fund
for Nature (WWF-Brasil): 104 pp.

Klink,  C.A.,  Moreira,  A.G.  &  Solbrig,  O.T.  (1993)  Ecological
impacts of agricultural development in Brazilian cerrados. In: The
World’s Savannas: Economic Driving Forces, Ecological Constraints,
and Policy Options for Sustainable Land Use, ed. M.D. Young &
O.T. Solbrig, pp. 259–82. Paris, France: Man and the Biosphere
Series Vol. 12, UNESCO.

Labes, L. (1999) Take it away! Brazil and GM soya. The Ecologist

29(1): in brief, p. 4.

Losey,  J.E,  Rayor,  L.S.  &  Carter,  M.E.  (1999)  Transgenic  pollen

harms monarch larvae. Nature 399: 214–5.

MacMillan, G. (1995) At the End of the Rainbow? Gold, Land, and
People  in  the  Brazilian  Amazon.  New  York,  USA:  Columbia
University Press: 201 pp.

Mantovani, J.E. & Pereira, A. (1998) Estimativa da integridade da
cobertura vegetal de Cerrado através de dados TM/Landsat. São
José  dos  Campos,  SP,  Brazil:  Instituto  Nacional  de  Pesquisas
Espaciais (INPE).

May,  P.H.  (1990)  Palmeiras  em  Chamas:  Transformação  Agrária  e
Justiça  Social  na  Zona  do  Babaçu.  São  Luís,  Maranhao,  Brazil:
Empresa  Maranhense  de  Pesquisa  Agropecuária  (EMAPA),
Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP) & Fundação Ford:
328 pp.

Mendez, P. (1999) As tendências do mercado mundial de grãos e o
avanço  das  áreas  produtores  de  soja  no  Brasil.  Unpublished
report, ‘Terceiro Atelier de Análise Prospectiva: A Dinâmica da
Soja e seus Impactos no futuro da Amazônia’. Brasília, DF, Brazil:
Ministério do Meio Ambiente. URL http://www.bcdam.gov.br
(1994)  The  Fragile  Miracle:  Building
Competitiveness  in  Bolivia,  Phase  One.  La  Paz,  Bolivia:  Monitor
Company.

Monitor  Company 

Mueller,  C.C.,  Torres,  H.  &  Martine,  G.  (1992)  An  analysis  of
forest  margins  and  savanna  agroecosystems  in  Brazil.  Brasília,
DF,  Brazil:  Institute  for  the  Study  of  Society,  Population,  and
Nature (ISPN).

Myers,  N.,  Mittermeier,  R.A.,  Mittermeier,  C.G.,  da  Fonseca,
G.A.B. & Kent, J. (2000) Biodiversity hotspots for conservation
priorities. Nature 403: 853–8.

Novaes,  W.  (1998)  Corda  em  casa  de  enforcado.  O  Estado  de  São

Paulo 7 August 1998.

Osava, M. (1999) Soy production spreads, threatens the Amazon in
Brazil. Inter Press Service, 10 September 1999. Archives at: URL
http://www.link.no/IPS/art/eng/serv/LA/1999/09/10/22.57
104.html (IPS/tra-so/mo/ff/ld/99).

Paterniani, E. & Malavolta, E. (1999) La conquista del ‘cerrado’ en

38

Philip M. Fearnside

el  Brasil.  Victoria  de  la  investigación  cientíﬁca.  Interciencia 24:
173–81.

Radiobrás (1999) Justiça cassa liminar que suspendeu licenciamento
de  hidrovia.  Agência  Brasil  30  September  1999.  URL
http://www.radiobras.gov.br/processados/NAC-19990930-
164618-0160.htm

Ratter,  J.A.,  Ribeiro,  J.F.  &  Bridgewater,  S.  (1997)  The  Brazilian
cerrado vegetation and threats to its biodiversity. Annals of Botany
80: 223–30.

Sánchez,  P.A.  (1976)  Properties  and  Management  of  Soils  in  the

Tropics. New York, USA: John Wiley & Sons: 618 pp.

Silveira, W. (1999) Juiz suspende licenciamento de hidrovia. Folha

de São Paulo 23 September 1999: A–7.

Smeraldi, R. & Veríssimo, A. (1999) Hitting the Target: Timber
Consumption in the Brazilian Domestic Market and Promotion of
Forest Certiﬁcation. São Paulo: Amigos da Terra-Programa
Amazônia & Piracicaba: Instituto de Manejo e Certiﬁcação
Florestal e Agrícola (IMAFLORA) & Belém, Brazil: Instituto
para o Homem e o Meio Ambiente na Amazônia (IMAZON):
41 pp.

Smith,  N.J.H.,  Serrão,  E.A.,  Alvim,  P.T.  &  Falesi,  I.C.  (1995)
Amazonia:  Resiliency  and  Dynamism  of  the  Land  and  its  People.
Tokyo, Japan: United Nations University Press: 253 pp.

Spehar,  C.R.  (1995)  Impact  of  strategic  genes  in  soybean  on  agri-
cultural  development  in  the  Brazilian  tropical  savannahs.  Field
Crops Research 41: 141–6.

Stedman-Edwards,  P.A.  (1999)  Root  causes  of  biodiversity  loss,
Case  study  of  the  Brazilian  cerrado.  Unpublished  report,
Washington, DC, USA: World Wildlife Fund: 37 pp.

Switkes, G. (1999) Gouging out the heart of a river: channelization
project would destroy Brazilian rivers for cheap soybeans. World
Rivers Review 14(3): 6–7.

Switkes,  G.  (2000)  Site  of  ACBL’s  planned  barge  port  in  the
Pantanal  wetlands.  Unpublished  report.  International  Rivers
Network, Berkeley, CA, USA.

Théry,  H.  (1999)  Dinâmicas  geográﬁcas  da  soja  no  Brasil.
Unpublished report, ‘Terceiro Atelier de Análise Prospectiva: A
Dinâmica  da  Soja  e  seus  Impactos  no  futuro  da  Amazônia’.
Ministério  do  Meio  Ambiente:  Brasília,  DF,  Brazil.  URL
http://www.bcdam.gov.br

Veening,  W.  &  Groenendijk,  J.  (2000)  Extractive  logging  in  the
Guianas:  The  need  for  a  regional  ecosystemic  approach.  In:
Amazonia  at  the  Crossroads:  The  Challenge  of  Sustainable
Development,  ed.  A.  Hall,  pp.  25–40.  London,  UK:  Institute  of
Latin Ámerican Studies (ILAS), University of London.

Veríssimo, A. (1999) Soja é uma alternativa para exportação. Gazeta

Mercantil (Brasília) 24 August 1999.

Vieira, A. & Giraldez, R. (1999) Um plantador no Planalto: maior
produtor  de  soja  do  mundo,  Blairo  Maggi  testa  habilidades
políticas no Senado e colhe frutos para seu próprio império. IstoÉ
(São Paulo) 16 June 1999: 84–6.

Williams,  G.W.  &  Thompson,  R.L.  (1984)  Brazilian  soybean
intervention.  American

international  effect  of 

policy—The 
Journal of Agricultural Economics 66: 488–98.

Zockun,  M.H.G.P.  (1980)  A  Expansão  da  Soja  no  Brasil:  Alguns
Aspectos  da  Produção.  São  Paulo,  Brazil:  Instituto  de  Pesquisas
Econômicas da Universidade de São Paulo: 243 pp.

